---
title: Introduction to harmony
slug: harmony-intro
abstract: A quick overview of the most practical bits of euroclassical harmony.
---

## Emotion and story

Music is a form of communication.
It’s used to express ideas and emotions,
and to evoke the same in others.

Western harmony,
which derives from the European classical music (“euroclassical”) tradition,
provides tools to do this,
based on tension and release,
consonance and dissonance,
and shared cultural experience.

### Tension and release

"Tension and release" is a basic biological mechanism,
shared perhaps by all life. 

It is the basis of locomotion---it physically moves us---and
it moves us emotionally as well.

### Consonance and dissonance

Tension and release are created with "consonant" and "dissonant" sounds.

Consonant sounds are mathematically simple and harmonically relaxing. 

Dissonant sounds are mathematically complex and harmonically tense.

### Expectation and surprise

Tension and release can also be created by playing with listeners' expectations,
developed through all the music they have previously heard,
if the musician has a similar enough background to know what those expectations are.

### The Hero's Journey

Additionally,
"harmonic functions" can be used to tell a kind of story,
similar in some ways to the _Hero's Journey_ narrative archetype:
the hero goes on an adventure, 
is victorious in a decisive crisis, 
and comes home transformed.

## Intervals: the building blocks

Intervals are the basic building blocks of harmony.
They are responsible for the way music sounds and how it makes us feel. 

### Pitch and frequency

An interval describes the difference in pitch between two tones.
The larger the interval,
the greater the difference in pitch.

Pitch is the frequency at which a sound wave vibrates.
The higher the frequency,
the faster the vibration,
and the higher the pitch sounds to our ears.

### Interval names (quality and number)

Intervals have names like "major third",
comprised of two parts: "quality" (major) and "number" (third).

### Interval numbers

The number or numeric size of an interval is the number of letter names from one note to the next in the musical alphabet.

For example, the interval from a C to a D is a second,
from C to E is a third,
and from C to G is a fifth.

The interval from C to the next C above or below is called an "octave" (meaning 8),
and from a note to itself is called a "unison" (meaning 1).

### Perfect intervals

The qualities of fourth, fifth, octave, and unison intervals are called "perfect",
because the sound waves of the pitches separated by those intervals vibrate together in an overlapping and mathematically simple way.
That is,
their "pitch frequency ratios" are mathematically simple.

### Consonance and dissonance (frequency ratios)

In a unison interval,
since the two pitches are the same,
their sound waves oscillate at the same frequency. 
The ratio between the frequencies is said to be one-to-one (1:1).

In an octave,
one pitch vibrates twice as fast as the other.
The pitch frequency ratio of an octave is said to be 2:1.

The ratio of a perfect fifth is 3:2,
and a perfect forth is 4:3.

These small-integer ratio frequencies are more consonant to our ears. 
Other intervals get mathematically more complex,
and therefore more dissonant to the ear.

The "tritone" interval, 
considered the most dissonant,
has a pitch frequency ratio of the square root of 2. 
This is a much more complex sound wave,
requiring more attention and processing
from our brains.

### Major, minor, augmented, and diminished intervals

The quality of the remaining non-perfect intervals are either "major" or "minor",
which is determined by how many "semitones" they contain.

Perfect intervals can also be raised or lowered by a semitone,
changing their quality from perfect to "augmented" or "diminished".

### Semitones

A "semitone" is the smallest interval in most Western music.
It's the difference between two notes on a guitar string on either side of one fret.
Semitones are also called "half steps".

A "tone" (or "whole tone" or "whole step") is two semitones,
a distance of two frets.

In Western music,
there are twelve semitones in an octave.

### Interval table

The following table shows the names of intervals based on how many semitones they span,
from lower to upper pitch.

The number of semitones can also be thought of as the number of frets between the two notes on one string.

The table also shows the corresponding note of a C chromatic scale for reference,
and the short and long names commonly used for the matching scale degrees.

It also includes the frequency ratio to the tonic,
which suggests how consonant or dissonant the interval will sound
(bigger numbers are more complex and therefore more dissonant).

<div class="table-wrapper" markdown="block">

| Semi-tones | Interval   | Note from C | Short scale degree name | Scale degree name | Frequency ratio |
|:--:|:-------------------|:------:|:------:|:----------------------|:-----:|
| 0  | unison (P1)        | C      | 1      | tonic, one            | 1:1   |
| 1  | minor second (m2)  | C#/ Db | b2     | flat two              | 25:24 |
| 2  | major second (M2)  | D      | 2      | two                   | 9:8   |
| 3  | minor third (m3)   | D#/ Eb | #2/ b3 | sharp two/ flat three | 6:5   |
| 4  | major third (M3)   | E      | 3      | three, major three    | 5:4   |
| 5  | perfect fourth (P4)| F      | 4      | four                  | 4:3   |
| 6  | tritone (TT)/ augmented fourth/ diminished fifth | F#/ Gb | #4/ b5 | sharp four/ flat five | 45:32 |
| 7  | perfect fifth (P5) | G      | 5      | five                  | 3:2   |
| 8  | augmented fifth/ minor sixth (m6) | G#/ Ab | #5/ b6 | sharp five/ flat six | 8:5 |
| 9  | major sixth (M6)   | A      | 6      | six                   | 5:3   |
| 10 | minor seventh (m7) | A#/ Bb | b7     | flat seven            | 9:5   |
| 11 | major seventh (M7) | B      | 7      | major seven, sharp seven, leading tone | 15:8 |
| 12 | octave (P8)        | C      | 8      | tonic, eight          | 2:1   |

</div>

### Inverting intervals

### Finding intervals on the fretboard with the major scale

- Major intervals are the same as the major scale degrees

## Chords

Western harmony is expressed through chords.

A chord is a group of two or more notes sounded together.

### Stacking thirds

In most Western music, 
chords are constructed by "stacking thirds".

Stacking thirds refers to adding successive intervals of a third until the chord has as many notes as we want it to.
Another way to think of stacking thirds is adding *every other* note in a scale. 

Building chords from stacked thirds is called "tertian harmony",
which is the most common type of harmony in Western music.
There are other types
(like "quartal harmony", which is based on stacking fourths),
but those are outside the scope of this book.


### Triad chords

A "triad chord" is a three-note chord built by stacking thirds.

Triads are the most common chords in Western music.

### Chord factors

The components of a chord are sometimes called "factors".

The lowest factor in a chord is called the "root".

The next factor is called the "third",
which is an interval of a major or minor third above the root.

The last factor in a triad is called the "fifth",
which is either a perfect fifth (most commonly)
or else an augmented or diminished fifth above the root.
The interval from the third to the fifth is a major or minor third.

### Triad chord types


There are four types (or "qualities") of triad,
based on the chord factor intervals.

<div class="table-wrapper" markdown="block">

| Triad quality  | Third interval        | Fifth interval (above third) above root |
| **major**      | M3                    | (m3) P5 |
| **minor**      | m3                    | (M3) P5 |
| **augmented**  | M3                    | (M3) #5 |
| **diminished** | m3                    | (m3) b5 |

</div>

## Tonical (aka tonal) harmony

- Music with a key center
- Euroclassical origin. 
- Common, but there are other kinds.
- Tonic vs leading tone. Tension and release. 

### Harmonizing a scale

- Building chords from scale degrees
- Roman numeral numbering

### Harmonic function

- The theoretical tendency of certain chords to "want" to progress to other chords, or remain at rest. 
- Euroclassical origin. Less used in modern and non-Western music, but still useful to understand.
- harmonic functions (tonic, subdominant/pre-dominant, dominant)
- V-I cadence and ii-V-I progression
- chord families 
  - tonic: I and vi (some also include iii, I disagree)
  - subdominant: IV and ii
  - dominant: V and vii (sometimes iii or III)

