---
title: Major key harmony
slug: major-harmony
abstract: The basic template of Western music.
---

Major key harmony starts with the major scale.
The following diagram shows the major scale on the upper strings,
with the tonic on the first string (and also the fourth string).
(See {% include chapter-link.html slug="major-scale" %}
for details.)

{% include figure.html 
    caption="Major scale on upper strings with 1st-string tonic." 
    url="/assets/figures/major-key-treble-triads/1-major-scale.svg" 
    class="chord" 
%}

As described in {% include chapter-link.html slug="harmony-intro" %},
we find the chords in a major key by harmonizing the major scale.
There are seven chords in the key,
corresponding to the seven degrees of the scale.
These chords, which include only the notes found in the parent scale,
are called "diatonic" chords.
Diatonic chords are numbered with roman numerals,
so the "I" chord has its root on the 1&#x302; scale degree, 
the "V" chord has its root on the 5&#x302; scale degree, 
and so on.

We build the **I chord** by starting on scale degree 1&#x302; and "stacking thirds" ---
adding every other note (i.e. every alternate note, like 1-3-5 or 2-4-6)  until we have enough notes in the chord.
So we construct the I triad chord with the 1&#x302;, 3&#x302;, and 5&#x302; scale degrees.

The notes that make up a chord are called factors,
and named according to their generic interval from the chord root.
A triad chord has "root", "third", and "fifth" factors.
In the I chord, the "root" corresponds to the 1&#x302; of the scale,
the "third" corresponds to the 3&#x302; of the scale,
and the "fifth" corresponds to the 5&#x302; of the scale.

{% include figure.html 
    caption="I chord, major key 1st-string tonic." 
    url="/assets/figures/major-key-treble-triads/1-I-wide.svg" 
    class="chord" 
%}

If the third factor of a chord is a major-third interval from the root
(or put more succinctly, if the chord "has a major third"),
it's a major chord.
If a chord has a minor third,
it's a minor chord.

So in a major key,
the I chord is a major chord,
because it has a major third.

We can construct the other chords in the key in this same way. 
In the diagrams below, note that the two lowest strings have been left out in order to save space. 










<p style="margin-top: 400px;">


The diminished triad vii chord doesn’t get much love, 
with most people dismissing it as “rarely used” or “not practical”. 
But notice that it contains almost exactly the same notes as the dominant V7 chord, 
which is one of the most important chords in euroclassical harmony. 
This rootless V7 chord is often exactly the right sound to drive a chord progression home. 
It’s easy to play, 
and easy to add a bass note of either the 5 (for a true V7 chord) or the 7 (for a richer diminished triad) as desired. 
“Not practical”, eh?
