---
title: Playing in any key
slug: keys
abstract: Practicing chords in any (not every) key.
---

## About keys

Of the 12 notes in Western music,
7 are "natural",
represented by letters from the musical alphabet,
and 5 are "accidental",
represented by natural notes with a sharp or flat modifier.

The key of a composition identifies which of these 12 notes is used.

## Finding the sharp/flat notes in a key

### Natural keys 

Memorize a couple:
- C: no sharps or flats
- F: Bb

Natural keys other than C and F:
1. Find the key in the order of sharps.
2. Find the 2nd note to the left. 
3. All notes in the order of sharps *up to the second note to the left* are sharp. 

Ex. key of E has F# C# G# D#

### Flat keys

1. Find the key in the order of flats. 
2. Find the note to the right. 
3. All notes in the order of flats *up to the note to the right* are flat. 

Ex. key of Db has Bb Eb Ab Db Gb

### Sharp keys

Figure out notes in the natural key, and sharpen every one.

## Order of sharps and flats

Sharps: F C G D A E B  
*Father Charles Goes Down And Ends Battle*

Flats: B E A D G C F (the reverse)  
*Battle Ends And Down Goes Charles' Father*

## Learn fewer keys better

"Practice in all 12 keys" is a common recommendation in music instruction,
and it is probably a useful thing to do eventually.
But thinking of the principle of triage,
it's better to spend two hours on something in C major 
than 10 minutes on it in each of 12 keys.

The time to add another key to our practice is when there's a real-world need to play in that key,
or we have become bored with every key we have already practiced.
Otherwise, it's best to continue working with an already-practiced key.

Transposing keys is much easier on guitar than on an instrument like the piano.
On guitar the fingerings in different keys are mostly the same,
just anchored around a different part of the fretboard.
As a result,
on guitar it is much more efficient to learn a few keys well than it is to practice in every key.
