---
title: Introduction
slug: introduction
abstract: An overview of the topics ahead and how to use this book.
---

## Learning music on guitar

Over 2000 years ago,
the Greek philosopher and mathematician Pythagoras laid the foundations of Western music 
by studying the properties of vibrating strings.

Today,
the guitar is an ideal instrument on which to explore music ourselves in a similar way.

There are some basic differences when studying music on guitar versus a more conventional instrument like the piano.

For one thing,
transposition is easier on guitar than on other instruments,
because different keys can often be played with the same fingerings at a different fret.
It's therefore less important on guitar to devote equal practice to all 12 keys.
It's more useful to have C major down cold than to be partially fluent in many keys.

Musical staff notation is not as well suited to guitar as it is to other instruments like piano,
in part because on guitar 
the exact same pitch can be found at multiple places on the fretboard.

Therefore,
on guitar it can be more efficient to study music by focusing more on intervals,
and less on note names and staff notation.

## An overview of the ideas in this book

### Playing by ear and improvisation

The most important skill for learning to play an instrument is "using your ears".
Listening, essentially,
but "tuning" might be more precise.
Listening, making adjustments, and listening again,
in a feedback loop until the tone suits our taste.
Without this basic habit,
it's hard to get far making music. 

The simplest way to practice using our ears,
and actually the simplest way to play a guitar at all,
is to "play by ear".
This turns out to be easier than most people can believe,
until they actually try it as described in Part 1.

### Chords and harmony

Most beginning guitar players start by learning open position chords,
and gradually become adept at changing between them.
Then it's common to learn a few movable barre chord shapes.

The next step toward fluency is to understand the intervals of the chords and how they harmonize together.
This is the objective of Part 2.
The CAGED chord shapes will be thoroughly explored
and used as a basis for organizing this effort.

### Scales and melody

Scales are often misunderstood or misused,
to the extent that some guitar players avoid them almost entirely,
while others memorize and repetitively practice arcane shapes with little understanding or melody.

This is unfortunate,
because scales are the simple patterns that underlies almost all music.
In theory,
if we were stranded on a desert island with only the major scale
(and a full stock of provisions),
we could eventually reinvent diatonic harmony from first principles.

Part 3 describes a practical and enlightening approach to scales.

## How to learn

Master guitar educator Christopher Berg wrote an invaluable book that must be mentioned here:
*Practicing Music by Design: Historic Virtuosi on Peak Performance*
[(Berg, 2019)](references#berg-2019).
He reviewed recent "peak performance" literature,
about research into the development of expert skill,
and combined it with his expertise in the techniques of centuries of master musicians.


## How to use this book

